[00:00:00] [Music]

[00:00:28] Speaker 1: You’re watching Channels Television broadcasting from Lagos, but now we’ll be taking you live to Abuja, where you’ll be watching the vice-presidential debate organized by the Nigerian Elections Debate Group (NEDG) and the Broadcasting Organizations of Nigeria. Please, stay with us.

[00:00:53] Speaker 2: [Inaudible] presidential debate. The candidates are intellectuals in their own right. Tonight, it will be a contest of wits. The battle for the vice-presidential seat is under the spotlight chance for voters to compare the candidates side-by-side. The stage is now set for an intense debate. Critical issues will be brought to the table. If you thought it would be easy, think again. Five candidates, one stage; who will prevail? Brace up, everyone. We are live from Abuja, the capital of Nigeria. Ladies and gentlemen, welcome to the NEDG/BON vice-presidential debate, 2018.

[00:01:32] [Music]

[00:01:42] Moderator: Hello and welcome to the 2018 vice-presidential debate, organized by Nigeria Elections Debate Group and the Broadcasting Organizations of Nigeria, supported by its partners: Civil Society Election Situation Room and WARDC. We are live in Abuja, the nation’s capital. Tonight, five candidates selected through an impartial and transparent multi-layer survey, and a number of selection criteria alongside an online poll. It’s about 60 days to the 2019 presidential election in Nigeria, but before then, a debate is necessary to promote civil discourse and provide a platform for these candidates to articulate their positions on public policy as well as intimating the people on their style of leadership and problem-solving abilities.

Tonight, we will be engaging the vice-presidential candidates whose personalities when elected into office, amongst other things, to advise the president and superintend the Economic Council. This debate is a simulcast running on many platforms across the globe and on BON member stations. There are set rules and guidelines for the debate. The candidates are aware and have agreed to those guidelines. This two-and-half hour debate is divided into segments: fitness for office, economic policies and direction, governance, security and social development as well as the economy.

Before we get into the flow of the debate proper, let me invite to the stage the executive secretary of the Nigerian Election Debate Group, Mr. Eddie Emesiri, for his opening address.

[00:04:03] Mr. Eddie: Good evening, ladies and gentlemen. You’re welcome to the 2019 vice-presidential elections debate, put together by the Nigerian Election Debate Group and Broadcasting Organization of Nigeria. I am Eddie Emesiri, the executive secretary of NEDG. It gives me great pleasure to welcome you to this event. It is another history-making event in the politics of our nation. As we know, we are at a critical stage in our history where we are faced with series of decisions one of which is to elect a credible president that will lead this nation, which is the most populous nation in Africa, for four years.

It is an opportunity to see how the tremendous opportunities will be brought up. Africa is looking up to this giant to push upward and forward, and the world is also waiting for us to excel. How we do that is now left to us. Tonight, we bring on-stage those who are seeking to be vice-president in a debate that will put to test the understanding and the abilities to act as president, lead the economic team, and assist the number-one person to steer the affair of this great nation to greater four years. The selection of these five parties that will be represented here tonight is perhaps one of the most difficult tasks the debate board and the committee who sat on the selection committee have faced in years.

But it is done carefully, fairly, and in the most credible manner using multi-layered system. It is scientific and a series of other globally accepted standards. The debate tonight is about issues ones that will shapen the future of this great nation in the years to come. I do hope as you watch tonight, from wherever you may be in the country today and around the world, in your minds, the love and passion for Nigeria will grow more, and you’ll make the right decisions at the polls next year. On behalf of my colleagues, welcome to the 2019 presidential elections.

[00:07:06] [Applause]

[00:07:11] Moderator: Let’s also welcome the convener of the Civil Society Situation Room, an umbrella body for most of Nigeria’s civil society organizations who are also supporters of this debate: Mr. Clement Nwankwo.

[00:07:27] Mr. Clement: Distinguished ladies and gentlemen, your Excellencies, welcome. We are delighted to be supporting this debate because we think it’s important for citizens to understand those who are seeking their mandate those who are seeking their vote. The importance of citizens been able to make a decision regarding who governs them is the ultimate goal of democracy. This country has practiced democracy since 1999.

We demand increased democracy which means that those who are seeking our mandate should only be able to govern us because they have earned our votes, and that’s why we’re especially delighted as this debate is happening this evening, it’s an opportunity for citizens to understand those who are seeking their mandates, what it is they seek to do for the citizens, for the country, to lift us up from where we are to greater heights. This country has incredible potentials, we have incredible human resources, and we believe that those who are seeking to rule us, to govern this country, to be a manifestation of the deep levels of incredible resource human resource that this country has.

Nigerians are listening, and we’re hoping that the vote of Nigerians only will be what determines who governs us. Thank you so much.

[00:09:03] Moderator: Let me state at this point that none of the candidates who are appearing here today or their party members have seen any of the questions we are going to be asking them. The audience here in this auditorium has also agreed to remain silent. No cheering. No jeering. That way, this debate will achieve its purpose. But the exception to that rule is now as I introduce the candidates in alphabetical order using their party acronyms. The candidate of the Allied Congress Party of Nigeria, ACPN, Ganiyu Galadima.

[00:09:51] [Applause]

[00:09:57] Moderator: The candidate of the All Progressives Congress, APC, Yemi Osinbajo.

[00:10:10] [Applause]

[00:10:24] Moderator: The candidate of the Alliance for New Nigeria, ANN, Khadija Abdullahi-Iya.

[00:10:40] [Applause]

[00:10:52] Moderator: The candidate of the Peoples Democratic Party, PDP, Peter Obi.

[00:10:58] [Applause]

[00:11:08] Moderator: And the candidate of the Young Progressives Party, YPP, Umma Getso.

[00:11:15] [Applause]

[00:11:29] Moderator: Now that we have the full complement of all the candidates, could we please rise for the National Anthem.

[00:11:39] [Nigerian National Anthem Plays]

[00:12:28] Moderator: Thank you. This debate is streamed on all our online platforms. You can join the conversation on Twitter using the hashtag, #2019Debate. #2019Debate. [Pause] All right, I’ve just a while ago been handed the questions. You can see, the candidates, sealed. None of you has seen them. None of your party members has seen any of these questions. So we shall proceed to open the envelope, and we shall begin the debate. First, we need each of the candidates to have an opening statement of three minutes each, and we begin with the candidate of the Allied Congress Party of Nigeria, ACPN. Your three minutes begins now.

This transcript is brought to you by ScribeText. Click here to get the first 10 minutes of your audio/video transcribed for free.

[00:14:00] Ganiyu: Hello, candidates, the moderator, distinguished audience, ladies and gentlemen. First of all, I want to give glory to God for giving this for giving us the opportunity to be here today. And my sincere gratitude also goes to the NEDG for giving us the opportunity to speak to Nigerians. This is not the first opportunity of my party to face with Nigeri to face Nigerians in a presidential contest. In 2015, we participated equally in NDGE debate for all presidential candidate.

Even though, then, I was a presidential candidate, but between 2015 and now, I think we have recorded little or no improvement in governance, and the life for our people is becoming the worse for it making Nigeria to be tagged the capital of poverty in the world, which is very disheartening. So I want to say that we cannot continue to do the same thing the same way and be expecting different results. There’s need for Nigerians to look at the candidates and their manifestos before they can cast their vote. Nigerians are the worse for it, and the GDP of the country is becoming lower and lower becoming lower and lower.

The bane of this is that unemployment is becoming higher and higher, and this is because of the wrong policy of the government. In 2015, what you were told by the APC was that the subsidy was a fraud. As it is today, Nigeria is subsi subsidized. The Nigerian government is subsidizing petroleum product, PMS, to the tune of N2 billion daily. N2 billion daily. If you calculate N2 billion, approximately N2 billion daily times 30 days, it’s too staggering. That is to say that we are subsidizing inefficiency. We are subsidizing the [rich?]. And funds that are hitherto are supposed to go into development, into infrastructure, and to build other sectors of the economy are being, are being frittered away.

It’s the reason —

[00:17:05] Moderator: Your time is up.

[00:17:05] Ganiyu: why in it’s the reason why in 2019 —

[00:17:07] Moderator: Your three minutes is up. Thank you very much. It’s now the turn of the candidate of the Alliance for New Nigeria (AAN), Khadija Abdullahi-Iya.

[00:17:20] Khadija: Good evening, sir. Good evening, ladies and gentlemen. Good evening, fellow candidates. My name is Khadijah Abdullahi-Iya. I am a nation builder, lawyer, and a social entrepreneur. I was born 44 years ago into the family of Alhaji Audu Kongila. I was born in Kaduna, grew up in Lagos and came back to the North. I studied Law from the University of Abuja and had my Master’s degree from the University of Jos. I gained my experiences from the legal practice, banking and finance, and media. I founded S. I. Magazine Ltd., which is focused on humanitarian journalism and social development.

Before S. I. Magazine, in 2006, I founded an NGO called Beyond Mentor Community Care Initiative, which is devoted to women and children promoting women, women empowerment policies, encouraging literacy at the grassroot and cultivating the spirit of patriotism. I am passionate about women particularly passionate about the plight of children. That’s why most of my programs are focused on and focused and targeted at the children and youth. I believe that we should all be concerned about the plight of children in Nigeria, and I bid and that is basically securing our future, the future of our children, our future.

I am vying for the posi for the office of vice-president of Nigeria because I am concerned about the over every one of the over 2.1 million children in the Northeast and the IDP camps which are scattered across Nigeria. I am also concerned about the 13 million children who are out of school. I am, as a wife and a mother of seven, I am committed to, in every resource of authority at my disposal, to ensure that every child, every young person, every mother, and every father gets the opportunities that they deserve in their pursuit of happiness. Thank you.

[00:20:01] Moderator: Thank you very much. Thank you for keeping within your timeframe. The candidate of the All Progressives Congress, Professor Yemi Osinbajo, your opening statement.

[00:20:14] Prof. Yemi: Thank you very much, and good evening, everyone, good evening fellow candidates. I’ll just go straight to where we’re at as a government, beginning with our journey in infrastructure. Today, we have begun perhaps one of the largest infrastructure projects in the history of our country. We’re building railways between Lagos and Kano. That medium that medium gauge railway, we expect that the first phase of it that’s the Lagos/Ibadan part of it will be ready in January. At the same time, we’ve done the Aldj-Warri; all we are left with is supplying fit stock to it.

Kano-Maradi rail, which is one of the oldest commercial routes in the country, that has just been given, and the KFW, the German the German Bank is sponsoring that, is sponsoring that railway: the Kano-Maradi railway. We are also looking at Lagos -Calabar rail. And these are some of just the rail routes in every in every state of Nigeria today, we have a major road project. Practically, 16 years after the Lagos-Ibadan Expressway was abandoned, we are dealing with that today, and we’re building that Lagos -Ibadan Road practically every day, today. That’s a major road out of the commercial nerve center of Nigeria.

At the same time, agriculture. In the area of Agriculture, barely 5 years ago, this country was importing $5 million of rice every single day. Today, we’re down to 90 percent left. We are, we are, we’re producing 90% of the rice that we consume, and we are importing only 2% what we used to import. At the same time, we are doing other there are other forms of produce. Sorghum, for example, is fast replacing barley. We’re also in cashew and practically every other area. Agriculture in Nigeria today has certainly gone up in leaps and bounds; I hope we have time to talk about that later on.

We have a social investment policy, possibly the largest ever in the history of our country. 500 billion is what we’re investing in every cycle. Under the N-Power scheme, we are employing 500,000 graduates, and the 500,000 graduates are in every single local government. At the same time, we have the homegrown school feeding program, 9.2 million children are fed every single day in 26 states of Nigeria. We have what is called the Government Empower Government Empowerment and Enterprise Scheme, which is a microcredit loan. We have market money which is the small which is for small businesses and then we have the trader money which is for the petty trader.

So far, we’ve done about 1.4 million petty traders and market people in all. At the same time we’ve got under that same SIP, we have the Conditional Cash Transfer scheme, taking at least 400,000 people so far out of poverty —

[00:23:19] Moderator: Thank you very much. Thank you.

[00:23:19] Prof. Yemi: Thank you very much.

[00:23:22] Moderator: It’s the turn of the candidate of the People’s Democratic Party (PDP), Peter Obi.

This transcript is brought to you by ScribeText. Click here to get the first 10 minutes of your audio/video transcribed for free.

[00:23:28] Peter Obi: Mr. Vice-President, fellow candidates, [pause] we now live in a country where we have the highest number of poor people in any nation, 87 million, and growing 6% every minute. Our country today has the highest number of out-of-school children in the world, our HDI has dropped from 152 to 157. Our Global Competitive Index has dropped from 124 to 127. In terrorism, we have moved from seven to number three, just behind Iran and Afghanistan. Our inequality have worsened. Our misery index have worsened. Our stress index, we are now 148 to 149. If you look in all these, it seem from two things from studies, and that is on education and unemployment.

Our unemployment have moved from 24 as you know to 40 today. The more you can invest in education, the better your economy; that shows we are not investing in education. In your own in issue of unemployment, which is worsened, we have millions of our children out of school, and you can see from a study that there’s a [inaudible] between SMEs and growing your economy and we are not supporting our own SMEs very well. If you look at what China has been able to do with the SMEs, SME in China is contributing 60% of their GDP. And 60% of China GDP is 7.2 trillion, which is 18% of Nigerian GDP. They are contributing 60% of the employment.

On urban employment, they are contributing 80%. 80% of urban unemployment in China is 480. 80% of that is four 380, which is twice Nigerian [inaudible]. China today, using the same SME, is guaranteed 10 million jobs annually. This year alone, half of this year, China have produced 7.2 million jobs which is over 40% of their target. Within the same period, Nigeria lost 44 million jobs. So we need to rejig this and have a better focus on how we can create jobs. As long as we don’t create jobs and have the number of unemployed youths in their productive age that we have today, we are going to have crisis.

That’s why we have issue of insecurity, issue of instability, all sort of things we are witnessing today is because we have not been able to create jobs that other countries are creating with effortless ease. And I know that Atiku Abubakar-Obi presidency can produce jobs which is most critical to what we want today.

[00:26:33] Moderator: Thank you very much. Thank you. Candidate of the Young Progressives Party (YPP), Umma Getso.

[00:26:43] Umma: Thank you very much, Mr. moderator, thank you, BON, thank you, Channels and all the organizers of this wonderful and memorable event. My name is Umma Abdullahi Getso, from Kano State daughter of a former senator in Kano State, and a person that’s grown and brought off into a political home. I have a passion for the girl child education, and I spend the early years of my adulthood in the development of a common Nigeria. I was the pioneer member, founder of [inaudible] Multi-Purpose Cooperative Society in Bauchi, which has impacted the lives of a lot of rural women in Bauchi.

And I later on founded Youth Enlightenment of Nigeria, which up till now, we are empowering young men and women in the country. I, later on, joined the political system, which I co-founded: New Progressive Movement a party that intend to create a kind of avenue where the youths can test-run what they have politically. And now, as a member, as a running mate of Professor Kingsley Moghalu, I want to use this opportunity to thank the organizers of this event. And our pre my presidential candidate is a person that has a lot to offer to Nigeria, because if you compare him with the choices we have, we can see that Professor Kingsley Moghalu is among the best, because he has experience in all sectors of the economy which is the main problem we are having today in Nigeria.

And I as Umma Getso felt that I should join this race, because I am a passionate Nigerian. I so much believe in Nigeria working again. And as a as a mother of three, as a wife, as a normal person, I’ve been to the lowest level of Nigeria’s standard of living, and I know how Nigerians are suffering. I know that there is no substantial thing from 2000 from 1999 to date, that a typical Nigerian will show today and say, yes, I am proud of my country. So to be candid, YPP is a party that is here to give a new thing. It’s a party that’s founded with the new ideology to bring in the paradigm shift, a bunch a kind of new set of politicians, new set of people.

Because we cannot deal with people that destroy our past to come and to expect, and expect them to come and improve our future tomorrow. So we are trying, we in our party, we have a lot of support from the youth and because we all know that the youths are the future of tomorrow. So in my party, we so much believe in the new Nigeria: a Nigeria where every Nigerian will have an equal right and will have a story to tell tomorrow. Thank you very much.

[00:29:44] Moderator: Thank you very much. Thank you very much for all of you. Well, we’ll go on a very short break, and when we return, we will be meeting our candidates on their ambitions. Stay with us.

[00:30:00] [Music]

[00:30:09] [Adverts]

[00:32:52] Moderator: Candidate of the ACPN, the office of the vice-president is often seen as that of a spare tire, a spare tire role to the Office of the President. Do you think the office needs more responsibilities, or it’s okay as it is defined in the Constitution, the Nigerian 1999 constitution as amended?

[00:33:19] Ganiyu: I have not seen the office of the vice-president as a spare tire, because it is the same constitution it is the same qualification that the president of a country, of our country, must have that the vice-president must have. And beside, roles were specified for both the President and the vice-president. And don’t forget, if the president is if the president is not around, it is the vice-president that take over. And I want to tell you, to know how important the office of the president is, that it is not inferior to the presidency. It’s that if the vice-president of a country takes any decision as acting president, the president of a country cannot legally, cannot legally go against that action.

I remember when our President was away for some time, the Vice-President acted, and all decisions that were taken by him as the Acting President of this country were never controverted by the President. So the President the vice-president of a of this country, it’s just like the office of the President. They have the same status; although, one is higher, but none is inferior to the other.

[00:34:39] Moderator: Thank you very much. Candidate of the ANN. Should you win this forthcoming election, you will be the first female vice-president of Nigeria. How prepared are you for that role and the responsibilities that come with it?

[00:34:57] Khadija: Thank you for the opportunity to be here. Being a nation builder sticks from the heart. Somebody that builds from the builds a human being that starts from the human development. So being having to be, to take the position of a vice-president is not something that should be taken lightly because a nation builder is that person who sees a problem and resolves it. Our party is known, well-known for what it stands for. It’s we’re not talking about we’re not the politicians of the usual this that promise this and that. So what we are going to do is to ensure that every policies that have been taken collectively as a party will be implemented effectively.

We have shared values, we understand what the policies are, we understand what the issues are, which issues who are who goes to the root of humanity. That is what we stand for. We stand for humanity and community development. So being a vice-president of Ni the Federal Republic of Nigeria is a, is a, is an office which must be taken seriously. It’s an office which participates in all the cabinet meetings at the office who which is about the economic development of who handles which handles the issues of economy.

So what we are trying to do in our, in our, in our party is to ensure that economy is diversified, the economy is vibrant enough to stop the too much dependency on a mono-economy that we are used to, to ensure that every aspect every aspect of the 774 local governments that we have in Nigeria is, is upgraded to a commercial hub where every, every resource, every mineral resources would be, would be enhanced and upgraded, where we would ensure that the issue of unemployment and every other issue that affects our economy right now will be well taken care of. So it is not an office that should be taken for granted.

And as I stand, because of my background in humanitarian services and issues and as a mother, these are we’re used to a country who put politics before economics. In our party, we are putting economics before politics because economics is the driving force. We’re doing agriculture, we’re talking about that the diversification of agriculture which the that this administration has already been doing, but what we’ll do is much more than what the this administration is doing it.

[00:38:00] Moderator: Thank you very much.

[00:38:01] Khadija: Yeah. Thank you.

[00:38:04] Moderator: Candidate of the APC. You have been vice-president for the past three-and-half years almost three-and-half years. How tasking has this role and responsibility been for you?

[00:38:17] Prof. Yemi: Thank you very much. I first I’m sure that those who know me quite well know that my hair was not this grey when I started out [laughter] in 2015. So really, it has been tasking. It has been tasking, but it has also been an incredibly rewarding experience especially from the point of view of the ability to do the things that one wanted to do all along as an individual. But the role is one where you are in many senses the Chief Advisor to the President of the country and possibly the one person that, that will represent him even just when he’s absent for, you know, for a meeting as opposed to even when he’s absent for longer period.

So there is a sense in which the role of the vice-president is one that very closely mirrors the role of the President in very profound ways. But our vice-presidency is different from the vice-presidency of other countries because unlike other countries, even countries that have similar constitutions, our own Constitution actually specifies roles for the vice-president. So the vice-president is the Chairman of the National Economic Council. That is the council that that’s the Council where all of the governors of the state meet every once in a month and the vice-president chairs that. That’s a constitutional role. Aside from that, the vice-president is also the chairman of the NCP that’s the National Council on Privatization.

The vice-president is also statutory chairman of about 22 different parastatals and agencies, and these are all defined by law. So in some senses, I mean, those who say for example that the vice-presidential or the vice the role of the vice-president is a spare tire have it wrong, because they probably are looking at other jurisdictions. In our jurisdiction, there are very specific roles that the vice-president is entitled or is empowered by law to perform. But I think that one of the more interesting things about that role also is the fact that, still, a lot depends on the trust that exists between the President and the vice-president, because the president does delegate several of his roles and he can delegate those roles depending, of course, on how on the kind of trust that exists between, between both parties.

So very so, many times also, that role is one where a good degree of trust is required between the two players: namely the president and vice-president. Where that trust exists, I think there is plenty of room for activity for the vice-president, there’s plenty that the vice-president can do. And finally, I think that the role of the vice-president is one which also requires, you know, I think a great deal of patience. A great deal of patience because you may not always agree, you know. You may not always agree with policy, you may not always agree with, with, with all the various aspects of what is being done. You may not always agree —

[00:41:22] Moderator: Thank you very much. Thank you. Time is up. Candidate of the PDP. Now, we have seen vice-presidents fall out with their principals. And should this happen to you, if you win the forthcoming election, how would you handle it?

[00:41:40] Peter Obi: Well, I assure you that, that won’t be that won’t be the case. Because like he’s clearly stated, vice-president have a role, and the role of the vice-president-to-be is the most critical role because we are talking about the economy of this country. The main problem of this country today, it is the economy. Economy is on the [inaudible], and because it’s not working, it’s not creating jobs, it’s not doing anything, the vice-president is in charge of rejigging this economy and rebuilding it to where you can create jobs, to where you can be able to ensure that there is financing in various areas of our government. The vice-president is in charge of, example, debt management.

Today. we have virtually at a level where our debt is unsustainable because we are using over 50% of our revenues to service debt, which means we don’t even have enough to be able to do infrastructural projects that is needed, highly needed in this country. Today, your country is owing about 22.7 trillion: $80 billion. And we need to do more, and you can’t even find the money to do what you so the vice-president office is critical. That you are not today part of G20, you are not part of BRICS nation, even the MINT nation where you are is because you have a poor economy.

Because even if you look at the BRICS nations, every other government there, Mexico has a GDP of over 1 trillion and per capita of over 8,000. Turkey that is there has a GDP of 800 billion and per capita of over 10,000. Indonesia has the and your own is low. So the vice-president has a role: to build the economy, to create jobs, to be able to make the country work. So it’s a critical role. In falling out with the president, if you are doing the right thing, you can’t fall out with anybody. I can assure you of that. If you continue to do the right thing, because the vice-president who choose you, choose you for a reason: he knows that you have something to deliver.

So you are not there you’re there to be loyal to him and serve Nigeria faithfully. So I don’t see where there’s a problem. I can tell you I’ve never had any issue with anybody in government, and it won’t start with this, because we will together start making Nigeria work again.

[00:44:14] Moderator: Thank you very much. Candidate of the Youth Progressives Party. We run a presidential system of government which concentrates a lot of power in the office of the president. In a situation where you have a principal who hardly relinquish relinquishes power and authority even when the constitution mandates him or her to do so, how do you deal with such a situation?

[00:44:41] Umma: Thank you very much, Mr. moderator. Let me start from the platform we are on. In Young Progressive Party, I think there’s no any other party in Nigeria that has given priority to women, because most of the offices we have, even in the national level, are always these are the woman is up and the man is deputizing or the man the woman is the the woman is the man is up and the woman is deputizing. Professor Kingsley Moghalu’s presidency is about giving 50/50 opportunity to women to participate in his government in all levels of office in all offices.

So I don’t think there’s any presidential candidate who came up openly without any of reservation to make this public, and I’m very, very sure him making this public really he really mean business. And I don’t think at this level, he will reverse it. That gen 50/50 gender equity is almost the priority in whatever we are doing in YPP and Moghalu’s presidential, presidential candidacy. Thank you very much.

[00:45:53] Moderator: Thank you very much. Let me say at this point in time that the next round of questions, you have two minutes each to answer the questions, and you have one minute of rebuttal if you do have anything to contribute to that question. Now, let me begin with the YPP this end. It is said that about half of the Nigerian population lives in extreme poverty, which invariably gives us a sad appellation of the poverty capital of the world. How would you reverse this situation if you are elected vice-president of Nigeria?

[00:46:35] Umma: Well, this question is taking us back to job creation and economy. Economy is the backbone of each and every country; we all know that. And the economy of Nigeria, as we all know, it’s not given us what we are expecting. So economy alone can never be over-exaggerated, because an economy constitutes of the constitutional restructuring, healthcare, security, education, youth empowerment, employment opportunities or job creation. Let’s take let’s take the constitutional restructuring.

As Professor Kingsley Moghalu has, it’s in his own plan to restructure Nigeria, but constitutional restructuring because I know everybody today is busy talking about restructuring but we are talking of the real constitutional restructuring, whereby the central will, as in, give, distribute power down to the six geopolitical zones, and give them opportunity to test-run and to own the resources they produce and control them. This is a very, very major thing that will bring back our economy into life and create jobs. And the second thing is power.

If at all, today in Nigeria, we are able to just decentralize the grid and distribute power and to make a grid in all the six geopolitical zones, there will be job creation. There will be enough power or 24 uninterrupted power supply. And solving power issues alone can solve 70 or 80% of Nigerian problem, because power is what is holding us back today. If at all, in South Africa, they have only 75 million population and they are producing fifty something —

[00:48:38] Moderator: Thank you. Thank you very much. Candidate of the PDP. Now, closely related to that question is the fact that the aggregate investment in Nigeria in 2018 is put at about $60.8 billion only 13.6% of our GDP. It has never gone above 16% in the last 10 years. Now, why have we failed so woefully, and what are you going to do differently as a government?

[00:49:13] Peter Obi: If you look at our economy, aggregate investment is not where I’m going to look at, but you can look at the shallowness of the economy starting from everything. If you look at let me just use one thing: your capital market. Your capital market today is only $30 billion. We just lost two trillion anyway about almost eight billion dollars in the past one year. But look at it, South Africa is $900 billion dollars, the second economy in Africa. That shows the shallowness of your economy, because what you are doing is that you have a government that is trying to do what it’s not supposed to do.

The role of government is supervision, and create the support and the guarantees that will enable private sector to drive the economy. So that investment needs to triple because it’s even low compared with your that’s why your size of your economy is very shallow. So, for us and that is why it’s not creating jobs. That is why you have the level of unemployment you have today. So if you are talking about how to drive up the investment, if you look at everything that has been done, is that you need to look at the overall economy, rejig it properly where the private sector will drive the economy, there will be more investment, a lot will be viable, your banks today, all the loans they’ve given is about 15% of your GDP when other countries are doing 50, 100%.

China alone is doing 250% of their GDP as credits to businesses to private sector, and you can see why you have better investment in other nations than Nigeria.

[00:51:06] Moderator: Thank you very much. Candidate of the All Progressives Congress, whereas in 2018, Nigeria had an aggregate investment of 60.8 billion, a country like China has an aggregate investment of $5 trillion, which is about 41% of its GDP. South Africa here in Africa, has a $65 billion aggregate investment, which is about 18.56% of its GDP. But in the last 10 years, Nigerian has not risen beyond 16%. What is the problem, and how can it be tackled?

[00:51:53] Prof. Yemi: I think the common a common denominator of the countries you’ve mentioned, both China and South Africa, is strong infrastructure. Our country, over the past 16 years, has suffered a major infrastructure deficit. So we don’t have rail, we don’t have roads, power, you know, when we came into office in, in 2000 in 2015, power was at 4000 megawatts. That is 16 years in 16 years. So you need strong infrastructure, and nobody can make excuses about that: you’ve got to have strong infrastructure, which is one of the major focuses of our administration’s policy in putting in place the right infrastructure.

The second thing is that you cannot have a thriving economy if you allow the type of ground corruption that has taken place in Nigeria in the past 16 years. I’ve heard one of our one of the candidate say that fighting corruption is not an economic policy. With all due respect, if you don’t have resources, if you don’t have money, if the resources have been stolen, then you cannot possibly even generate jobs. You can’t even build infrastructure. In the past in the past three years, the government of President Muhammadu Buhari has spent 2.7 trillion on capital in Nigeria. That is the highest ever in the history of Nigeria, despite earning 60% less than the previous government.

We have we have earned we have currently spent 2.7 trillion in two budget cycles, and we’re earning 60% less. When oil was at a $100 to a $114 a barrel, no infrastructure was built. Today, oil is at [sub-sixty?]. When we came into office, we were at $28, going on to $30, yet we spent more on capital and on infrastructure. The second thing is that you must have poverty if you don’t do if you don’t have social investment scheme. I’ve heard some mention already about countries like India, like Mexico, like Brazil. These are countries that had a social investment policy, and that’s —

[00:53:57] Moderator: Thank you, sir.

[00:53:57] Prof. Yemi: a sort of thing we have also.

[00:53:59] Moderator: Thank you, sir.

[00:53:59] Prof. Yemi: Yeah.

[00:54:01] Moderator: Well, candidate of the Alliance for New Nigeria. Nigeria’s Misery Index is currently put at 51.26%, which is a combination of the sum of its unemployment and underemployment even when you use the whole data and the current level of inflation. Now, what are you going to do to address this perennial and growing problem of misery and hopefully restore hope to the Nigerian common man?

[00:54:38] Khadijat: Because of the, as, as, because of the policies we have, in ANN (Alliance for a New Nigeria), poverty has become, like, endemic in every aspect despite what is we do expect the his Excellency, vice-president Osinbajo have said, for the, all the efforts that the government has put in. We are doing a complete overhaul. Most problems that we have is the fact that our over 774 local governments are not fully developed. What we are trying to do is we are going to, we are going to devote we are going to do the devaluation of power, we are going to do resource control, we are going to do revenue resource control and constitutional amendment, because those are the things that are structures that affect the endemic poverties that we have poverty that we have in Nigeria.

Number one, in devaluation of power, in the resource control policy that we have, we are looking at like I mentioned earlier that we are going to look at each resource that each local government has. Each government will be giving 20%. The 20% of the resource, the monies generated from each local government will be given to the people, 20% will be given to the local government, 20% will be given to the state government, and the 40% will be given. That way, more employment are generated, more monies are going round, more people in China, most people, most families, if you go to each family, at the local government level, you’ll find out that every person is producing something.

The more vibrant the economy is, the better we are able to eradicate poverty. Another aspect that we are going to tackle is education, which we are education is going to help to tackle most of the endemic poverty that we have in Nigeria. Thank you.

[00:56:40] Moderator: Thank you very much. Thank you. Allied Congress Party of Nigeria (ACPN) candidate, the value of the naira has depreciated over time. In fact, at some state, it dropped so sharply to $520 to I mean, N20 to a dollar before recovering, and now, we have multiple exchange rates in the country ranging from N305 to N364 per dollar. What policies or initiatives do you intend to pursue to bring the Forex market into equilibrium and reduce this misalignment?

[00:57:24] Ganiyu: Thank you. We are in a global village. The world is now a global village. And the level of production going on in a country determines the strength or otherwise of the currency of that country. If there’s no if much are not going on in the economy of that state, please forget it because as it is, Nigeria does not have the capacity to determine the rate that which the naira is exchanged for other currencies of the world. To ensure a higher value for the naira, we need, we need to look inward. An economy that depends solidly for everything to come into the country, for everything to be imported, it’s not a serious economy.

And until something is done to reverse the trend, what we’ll do is just to look inward to ensure that whatever we can produce locally, we don’t import it. Whatever we can produce locally, we don’t import it. Then we look at the economy to engineer it, to make sure that the economy works. For instance, in the petroleum sector, what we, what you do currently is to import all our PMS needs. This will be revised. We will make sure that even if if we at the moment does not have the capacity to refine and sell out, we, at least, we will our government will do something to make sure that we add value to the product that you are, that we are selling out.

That will, that will create job. And in the regulation, what we’ll do is to create the enabling environment and support the private sector to be able to drive the economy. As it is, the value of the naira is low because foreign direct investments are not coming, and until something is done to make sure, to give confidence to the [crosstalk] —

[00:59:29] Moderator: Thank you very much. Thank you. Your time is up. We’ll be going on a very short break, and when we return, we’ll be talking more about the economy. But please, let it be noted that if you have a rebuttal which you are entitled to for any of the points raised by any of the candidates, please, indicate and you’ll be given the opportunity, one minute, to do so. But that’s when we return from this break.

[00:59:58] [Break]

[01:03:23] Moderator: Welcome back, and thank you for staying with us. Before we went on that break, we were talking about your opportunity of the candidates to have an opportunity to do a rebuttal, and you have any clarifications to make, please, indicate, and you will have one minute. The candidate of the PDP indicated? Right. Please, go ahead.

[01:03:46] Peter: Well, let me clarify again what I’ve said when I said that fighting corruption is not an economic policy. It is not that you can’t fight corruption, but you can fight it more aggressively while addressing economic issues. For example, in 2015, unemployment and underemployment was 24%; today, it’s 40. In 2015, we were attracting $21 billion dollars in foreign direct investment; we attracted only 17 last year we attracted only 12 last year. That means it going to our GDP was 520 in 2015 and per capita was 200–2500. Today, it’s under 1900. If you look at our stock market, it’s lost over 2 trillion in one year. So that is not an economic policy.

You are not creating jobs, you are not doing the right thing, and you are just fighting corruption. You can’t shut down your shop and be chasing criminals.

[01:04:48] Moderator: Thank you very much.

[01:04:49] Peter: By the time you come back [applause] —

[01:04:51] Moderator: Thank you. Please, please, please, there are rules and guidelines to this debate. You are not allowed to cheer in the audience. You are not allowed to cheer, and you are not allowed to jeer at anyone. Please, let’s stick by the rules. Otherwise, we may be forced to remove you from the hall. Please, let’s be matured. Thank you. Candidate of the APC.

[01:05:32] Prof. Yemi: Thank you very much. Let me say also that if you allow criminals to steal all the inventory in the shop, there will be no shop. [Laughter] That’s the problem. [Crowd cheer].

This transcript is brought to you by ScribeText. Click here to get the first 10 minutes of your audio/video transcribed for free.

[01:05:43] Moderator: Please —

[01:05:45] Prof. Yemi: That’s the problem.

[01:05:47] Moderator: Please, please, please —

[01:05:49] Prof. Yemi: And what has and, and what has happened and what has happened to the Nigeria in the past 16 years is what the World Bank told us, that the major cause of our poverty is corruption. That’s the major cause. [Applause] That’s what we’ve been told. So, so, let me say, so let me say that there is no way that we can minimize what has happened. You can’t minimize corruption. If you minimize it, we run the risk of completely in fact, the argument is lost. We cannot do what we want to do unless we are able to minimize corruption or eradicate it completely which is what we are trying to do. I want to rebut the question about our debt figures.

I, well, frankly I know that I know that the candidate of the PDP knows very well —

[01:06:34] Moderator: Unfortunately, sir, your time is up.

[01:06:36] Prof. Yemi: Okay.

[01:06:36] Moderator: And let me —

[01:06:37] Prof. Yemi: I’ll take another [inaudible].

[01:06:38] Moderator: Let me again say that each time you cheer or jeer, you reduce the time of each candidate, and that time is very valuable, it’s very vital for him/her to make the necessary points. Please, let us reduce the completely eliminate the cheering and jeering, please. The next question is a common question for all the candidates. In two I mean, 2016, when there was a major adjustment in the price of petroleum products from N87 to N145, Nigerians reluctantly accepted this price hike with the understanding that this was going to be the last and that the word, petroleum subsidy, will be banished from the Nigerian government’s lexicon. Now, we hear of subsidy again.

What is any of you going to do differently to put this problem to bed? Candidate of the Allied Congress Party of Nigeria, two minutes.

[01:07:51] Ganiyu: Subsidy, subsidy, subsidy. [Laughter] That has been the greatest avenue that the resources of this nation are been frittered away. What our government in power will do is to do away with subsidy. You do away with subsidy! Firstly, there are a lot of inefficiency in the system. The PMF, the petroleum importers, it sometimes is ratcheting. They do ratcheting. In addition to this, there is, there is no effectiveness in it. And let me tell you, by continuing with subsidy, we are killing the economy of this country, and we are killing the people. We are doing away our government empowered by the grace of God, will do away with subsidy. What we’ll do is to de deregulate the sector.

In a situation where you fix prices, you are indirectly telling people not to come, because nobody will bring his/her capital into a venture that is not profitable. If petroleum product if our crude petroleum is deregulated, there are international investors and local investors that will come into this country to come and establish industry thereby creating so much jobs for our people. ACPN government in power will deregulate the petroleum sector, because subsidy is not even in the interest of the common man. Some of us, we have as, as many as 20, 30 cars that lot what are the common people on the streets, the poor peasant farmers, what are they benefitting from it?

Some of them don’t even have a bicycle? The subsidy regime only favors the rich. And any policy or program of government that does not favor the poor and the common man on the street, I think, should be do away with it. We will do away with subsidy so that we can create job massively —

[01:09:54] Moderator: Thank you very much.

[01:09:55] Ganiyu: for our people.

[01:09:56] Moderator: Thank you. Candidate of the ANN.

[01:10:00] Khadija: Good evening, sir. Subsidy subsidy is Nigeria is fraught with corruption. And if transparency is been applied to the excess money being gotten from the balance of the subsidy, it’s going to tackle a lot of problems that has fraught the nation. My big our, our what we’re big on in Alliance For New Nigeria is the fact that number one, we’ll attack the, the institutions to ensure that there’s there are, there is enough transparency, there is enough technological, technological issues technological GPS that is been upgraded to ensure that every kind of corruption is tackled. If subsidy is being eliminated what we want to do in Alliance For when it comes to is to number one, diversify the economy, which I’ve mentioned before.

If we are able to diversify economy, the economy and stop the dependency of on oil product, we’ll have little or no problem at all with subsidy. And once we are able to get the, the residue of the subsidy, we are using it to also do the four important things that we’ve always talked about: talking about restructuring of our infrastructure, we are talking about ensuring that most of these excesses are being allocated to various structures like education, health, healthcare system, and all talking about the, the complete overhaul of, of the, of the civil service system. So subsidy is not something that will, will it’s something —

[01:12:03] Moderator: Thank you very much.

[01:12:03] Khadija: that we’ll tackle properly.

[01:12:05] Moderator: Thank you.

[01:12:05] Khadija: Yes, sir.

[01:12:06] Moderator: Candidate of the APC.

[01:12:08] Prof. Yemi: Thank you very much. I think the major problem with subsidies are just the abuses that can attend a subsidy. A subsidy is not inherently a bad thing; it’s really the abuse. And I’ll explain very quickly. Now, what happened under the old subsidy regime was that several independent marketing companies would simply come in and say, “We delivered five cargoes of PMS,” whereas they delivered nothing or delivered only one, and so they made the subsidy in the [inaudible]. Today, it is the NNPC that is the sole importer of petroleum, so it is on the balance sheet of the NNPC that the subsidy is been taken.

Now, let me say also that if today, you were to remove subsidies, petrol prices could go up to as high as 220 N220 per liter. It could even go higher. Now, there is no country in the world at least, even the most developed countries that don’t run one kind of subsidy regime or the other for the simple reason that sometimes, you just need to take some of that effect some of the cost-effect away from your citizens. So for example, America subsidizes agriculture, subsidized production, subsidize all sorts of things. Now, if you have a petrol subsidy, and I am not saying that it must be there forever, but if you have the sub petrol subsidy, it helps, because the moment you remove the subsidy, price go up.

We experienced it early on in the regime: prices went up from 86 to N145 per liter, and then there was cost-push inflation. Transportation prices go up, food prices go up, even rents go up everything goes up. What now, while consumer spending is weak and while we are trying to develop the economy and develop the capacity of the people to spend money, I think that a subsidy at least, a minimal subsidy is useful now, and that’s why I think that the subsidy regime is one that we can tolerate, but obviously, is we must remove it as time goes on, but we can’t remove it immediately. Otherwise —

[01:14:09] Moderator: Thank you very much.

[01:14:09] Prof. Yemi: we’ll suffer the consequence.

[01:14:11] Moderator: Thank you very much. Candidate of the PDP.

[01:14:14] Peter: Well, what we are subsidizing today is inefficiency. If you get it right, the price will still come down. There is no way a country can have a budget of N340 billion for health, which translates to N5 a day for its citizens and then pay a trillion for subsidy. There’s no way you can have an education budget, which is the most critical component of your development, at four hundred and something billion and you are paying subsidy of a trillion. It is a waste. You need to reverse it because you’re not paying because of you are not dealing with engine that will drive the economy tomorrow. Today, everybody knows that even petroleum itself is a baggage economy.

At the time people are doing developing a new economy and then you are not paying attention to that, what are you actually subsidizing? Look at it: Nigerian are one of the low car ownership in the world. It’s 10 per thousand. So we have only 2 million vehicles, and you’re paying almost a trillion when you have 87 million people that are poor. You can’t do that. You totally need to reverse it. And I can tell you if you do the right things, the price will come down because you’re just paying for the delay in importation, the number of tanker [inaudible] stay in the port and everything. We can’t continue to pay for inefficiency in this country.

I can tell that you can remove it, do the right things, the price of petroleum will come down.

[01:15:50] Moderator: Thank you very much. Candidate of the YPP.

[01:15:53] Umma: Thank you very much, Mr. moderator. Well, I’m we’ve never been in government before, but the people that are presently and those that were have said a lot about the subsidy. I could remember during Jonathan when subsidy was removed, Nigeria was shut down. We were all out, which leads to a lot of things now. And along the line, during the early regime of President Muhammadu Buhari, still, subsidy is removed, and Nigerians were so patient thinking that we are going to achieve something. So I think you throw a question to us, but I don’t think as I’m standing here today have much to contribute, but to throw it to Nigerians, there was subsidy removal and still, subsidy removal and nothing has been done.

I will still, still heard them saying they are still paying subsidy, and the lives of Nigerians have not improved, and we’ve not seen anything substantial or something tangible on the ground. So to be candid, subsidy to a typical Nigerian is just a scam. That’s how I will call it; the way President Buhari once said it in the newspaper. Thank you.

[01:17:06] Moderator: Thank you very much. There’s no rebuttal?

[01:17:10] Prof. Yemi: I want to rebuttal.

[01:17:10] Moderator: Okay.

[01:17:13] Prof. Yemi: My rebuttal is simply this: that the question to ask the Nigerian is how much we are prepared to pay for petrol. That’s the question. Because if you say to a Nigerian, remove subsidy or not remove subsidy, you hide the fundamental question. The fundamental question is, are you ready to take a N40 increase in petrol prices today? We say no. We say that the average Nigerian cannot tolerate that price increase. That’s what subsidy is about. That’s what it’s about today.

[01:17:49] Moderator: All right. Yes.

[01:17:52] Ganiyu: Yeah, my rebuttal —

[01:17:52] Moderator: ACPN.

[01:17:53] Ganiyu: is still on, is still on the issue of subsidy. There are so many things that we can do with the removal with the subsidy that will be removed from petrol. For instance, PM AGO, diesel, is now a has been removed from the list of subsidy likewise kerosene. Kerosene that are mostly being used by the poor. The markets of supply and demand will eventually regulate it if it is if the subsidy is removed. And let me tell you, there are so many critical sectors than the subsidy redeemed can be deployed into. The agricultural sector is there. This in farming, there’s so many things we can do. Now, there’s crisis between farmers and cattle rearers. These people are not getting any attention from the government.

Subsidy that if it is removed, the whole sum of money that is been wasted on daily basis can be used to deploy to develop other sectors —

[01:18:59] Moderator: Thank you. Thank you; your time is up. Candidate of the ANN —

[01:19:03] Khadija: I was going I was going to say almost the same kind of things that he said about the issue of demand and supply to affecting subsidy, because I know that once subsidy is removed, there are excess for the government, and all the monies that are derived from those excesses can be used accordingly. But my problem is what is the government presently doing with the amount of money that has been subsid the subsidy that has been removed, the remnant of the money, that what is the government doing with it right now? Because it is not like what he said; it is now affecting the common man. We don’t know what is going on, so that is my question.

[01:19:43] Moderator: All right. Thank you very much. Let me come back to the candidate of the YPP. The Gross Domestic Product (GDP) performance recovered slightly in the third quarter of this year to 1.81% from 1.5% in the second quarter. The target under the Economic Recovery and Growth Plan, that’s the ERGP is 3%, but it has reached 1.81%. Now, this is interpreted as an evidence that we are still dealing with very fragile growth of the economy. What needs to be done?

[01:20:28] Umma: Thank you very much. No country will grow if its export is higher if its import is higher than its export. The main thing I think Nigeria needs to do is to put emphasis on production that’s the industrial sector, which our presidency by the grace of God is going to bring in to this country, because if at all, we will invest in our, in our on our youths. We intend to create a 1 trillion venture capital fund that we will inject into the youth and small scale and large scale industry in partnership with the private sector, to see how we can impact the lives of a typical Nigerian whereas every Nigerian can be an employer of labor, and this will definitely grow the economy and will lift the level of our GDP. Thank you.

[01:21:27] Moderator: Thank you very much. Candidate of the PDP. Now, the Nigerian economy as at today is still heavily dependent on the oil sector for its foreign exchange earnings and for other revenue. Now, what is or what will be your strategy for economic diversification? Because we have talked government after government have talked about diversification of the economy, but each time, we have seen not real effort at diversification. What will be your government’s strategy for diversification?

[01:22:10] Peter: You’ve just said it: there’s no real effort in doing that. You’ve got to look at the components of the contribution of various sectors to your GDP. And if you look at it, one component needs to be tackled: manufacturing. No country, no country that is doing well if you look at the GDP of China, 40% is for manufacturing. Indonesia, 40%. Malaysia, 40% even in the Western world. Yours is under 8, and your factories are closing down. So you need to reverse that and have you need to support your SMEs properly. Not just saying I will support them, but to do it more efficiently. You can look at your loan portfolios.

Today, the total loans by the banks is 19 trillion, and only five only .5%, about 5% 0.5% of that goes to your SMEs. When in other countries, it’s about 20%. So there’s no way; if you can support the SMEs properly and be able to work on your manufacturing which then leads to the most it’s from the your power. Because what you are generating today is too low. Look at your competitors. The lowest that you can see in the MINT countries is Indonesia that is generating 50,000 for 250 million people, and you are generating about 4,000 for 200 million.

[01:23:46] Moderator: Thank you very much. We will go on a short break, and when we return, the candidate of the APC will be taking his turn. Stay with us.

[01:23:55] [Break]

[01:27:45] Moderator: Welcome back, and thank you so much for your time. Let me make another appeal to our audience the studio audience here. Please, do not cheer, and do not jeer at anyone. In fact, if you do, I will have no choice but to stop the candidate who is speaking and allow you to continue the cheering or jeering, and then after that, he or she will continue because you eat into their time when you do that. Thank you very much for respecting the rules and the guidelines of this debate. Thank you. Time now to return to the candidate of the All Progressive Congress. Now, with a real GDP growth rate of 1.8% and a population growth rate of 3%, there is an indication that the condi the poverty condition in the country may further deteriorate.

What needs to be done? What should be the response?

[01:28:53] Prof. Yemi: First, let me say that our GDP has grown consistently in the past six quarters. It’s continued to grow, and it will continue to grow; the trajectory is upward, clearly. The second thing to note is that we are lending, and because MSMEs are extremely important small businesses are extremely important including petty trading. We are lending the highest-ever to small business in Nigeria, beginning with the government enterprises and promotions Government Enterprises and Empowerment Scheme, where we are doing about 35 billion in the cycle. BOI is doing about another 20 billion. Aside from that, we have we are obtaining from the AFDB, $500 million for entrepreneurship just entrepreneurship.

This is the highest lending ever to the MSME sector. I’ve been to 20 different states in Nigeria on what we call the MSME Clinics. And in every one of those states, what we’ve done is that we’ve taken the regulatory agencies to the MSMEs, and we’ve set up in many of the states. We’ve set up in many of the states a one-stop shop where the regulatory authorities function, because one of the chief problems that MSMEs have is access to the regulatory authorities and answers to their various questions. Now, that is being done. In addition to that, we are setting we’ve set up shared facilities in several, in several different states.

A shared facility is a place where you provide equipment, where you provide machinery that the small business cannot afford, and then the small businesses come and use it and share it. We have also done we’ve also put power infrastructure, as I said, is critical. We’ve put power in markets just so as to be able to encourage small business. In Ariaria Market for example, in Abia State, we put there is the we now have there a 2-megawatt power plant which just supplies the market aside from solar facilities there. And that’s what we’ve done also in Sabon Gari Market in Kano and several other places where we put infrastructure. Infrastructure is key —

[01:30:59] Moderator: Thank you very much.

[01:30:59] Prof. Yemi: to all of these things. Yeah.

[01:31:00] Moderator: Thank you. Candidate of the ANN. Now, if you are elected as the vice-president of Nigeria, you will be the chairman of the National Economic Council. Now, what kind of policy collaboration will you pursue with state governments to ensure the progress of the Nigerian economy?

[01:31:22] Khadija: So we have four cardinal Rs in Alliance for New Nigeria, which is to reduce the cost of governance, to restructure every economic leeway which includes the SMEs. Right now, the present Vice-President talked about how they have the SME Clinics. Most Nigerians have not felt the impact of these policies. What we are going to do in Alliance for New Nigeria is to ensure that every SMEs the biggest problem of an SME is tax. To get a free tax tax cut for, at least, three years and also to ensure that the tax the tax to at least ensure that all the SMEs have some depending on the kind of business that you are doing, you have some all the regulatory issues, all the bureaucracy that to operate in Nigeria as an SME will be curtailed.

We also have the issue the second R is the restructuring. Okay. The third R is the reforming of all [inaudible] of economic policies that drives the economic hub where what we are planning is to expand economic opportunities by building special economic zones in different zones in Nigeria, which would include the issue of the issues of the issues that we highlighted earlier on about the commercial hubs which will reduce the, the bureaucracy of going to exporting, also, having the hubs around. We are also going to talk about the, the third R, which is the reorientation of our minds to ensure that policies —

[01:33:25] Moderator: Thank you.

[01:33:25] Khadija: of economic nature are —

[01:33:26] Moderator: Thank you very much. Candidate of the ACPN. Our businesses in Nigeria complain generally about multiple taxation. What are you going to do differently? How are you going to reduce the burden of multiple taxation for businesses?

[01:33:47] Ganiyu: Yes. Multiple taxation is not good for the growth of businesses, and business owners are usually not happy about it. I’m a businessman too. If you are if you have over-burden me too much, I’ve I may be weakened and the business may eventually collapse. We have such a situation in one of the states in this country that industry are packing away to other places due to multiple taxation and tax burden. What we will do is to encourage business people by making sure that we structure the type of taxes in order to that we, that we impose on them in order to reduce tax burden.

And in most cases, to encourage some, especially new businesses that will be coming to the country, to grant tax tariff until the businesses get properly, properly, properly footed. And indeed, when you are talking about taxation, you are also talking about economy. We’ll do everything by encouraging the private sector to drive the economy, and we’ll embrace reform because if there’s no business, there’s nowhere the government will generate nobody will pay taxation. If you are not doing anything, you can’t pay tax. It’s as a result of this, that our party, the Allied Congress Party of Nigeria, is coming on board in this campaign, which we know the crucial issue that will be on the burner is the econo issue of economy and security.

We are bringing onboard an international economic advisor in the name of Dr. Oby Ezekwesili. He’s an expert in economy. He’s an expert, and we believe that the issue of the issue of economic problems of this country will be analyzed, will be analyzed, and she will take Nigeria back to the path of progress and prosperity.

[01:35:44] Moderator: Thank you very much. Any rebuttals on any issue? Candidate of the APC.

[01:35:50] Prof. Yemi: Just a quick just a quick rebuttal, and that is that we already have pioneer status. On new businesses, you already have a five-year tax holiday some between three and five years. There’s also just to point out to the to my fellow candidate that there’s also a tax threshold for small businesses, you know? Beyond that threshold is when you begin to pay taxes. So some of these tax holidays are already in place, you know? And perhaps he may have other ideas, but these are already in place.

[01:36:23] Khadija: I have a rebuttal.

[01:36:23] Moderator: Candidate of the ANN?

This transcript is brought to you by ScribeText. Click here to get the first 10 minutes of your audio/video transcribed for free.

[01:36:24] Khadija: Yes, I have you said they are already in place, but they are not implemented because I’m a business person, and I know how much tax that is being demanded from our little company. I’m belie I’m believing that once you have a once you have, once you are a small business, you need some kind of relief for the next one to three years one to five years, to ensure that you are able to garner some profit from what you’re what businesses that you are doing. But every time, all businesses are, are strangulated because of the tax the the Local Government Area will ask for tax, the all kinds of regulatory bodies will come and ask for the state government, the state if you are like we are operating a bakery in Minna.

Every time, they keep telling us, you have to pay for this board, you have to pay for that. And different kinds of people, because of the corruption, it has affected so many businesses that businesses cannot thrive because of all these —

[01:37:32] Moderator: Thank you very much. Thank you.

[01:37:33] Khadija: cause, so we need implementation.

[01:37:35] Moderator: Thank you. Well, let me start from here this time, and let me start with the candidate of the PDP. The African Continental Free Trade Area agreement; Nigeria was instrumental in putting that in place, but Nigeria is yet to sign. Would you say that Nigeria should sign and belong to the continental economic block? What advantages do you think Nigeria stands to reap from that?

[01:38:08] Peter: Nigeria needs to look at that agreement properly, because actually if you had built the economy as strong as it should be, we would benefit more. We have the biggest market. Yes, you would think about people bringing in their goods here, but considering that the resources of the human resources of this country and the entrepreneurial spirit of the average Nigerian, we would have been able to build facilities, manufacturing facilities that will drive export not just within Africa. African trade today is less than 9%. And even if we get it right, it will it can go as high as 30% or 40%.

The foreign exchange you’re seeing today, you’re not earning from oil. Oil line gives you 80% of your foreign exchange when, in fact, if you do if you do the right things, you can have twice that coming from manufacturing. Other countries that don’t have anything to do with oil are driving their foreign exchange earning all from manufacturing. So you have to look at the agreement, look at those things we are not doing well here, put them in place, and sign that agreement because it’s going to be a win-win for us. It’s just like the manufacturer saying let’s look at this. Let’s know what is there for us. There is no way you can be part of packaging something and it gets to the stage of signing, you walk out of it.

So when were what were you doing when you were part of packaging, putting it together? It doesn’t make sense.

[01:39:44] Moderator: Thank you very much. Candidate of the APC.

[01:39:47] Prof. Yemi: [Laughs] Frankly, I thought my colleague of the PDP would say whether to sign or not to sign, you know? But let me just say very quickly that there is a process of consultation which is going on with the private sector. That process is very important because one of the chief fears of an of the Continental Free Trade zone, one of the chief fears of it is the possibility of transshipment. Third countries will transship. So for example, a China can ship its goods to Benin Republic, and import to Nigeria under a free trade agreement. So we can have a situation where local industry is killed just by mere fact, just by the mere fact that we sign on to this without ensuring that all of the loopholes have been blocked.

So we are in the process of ensuring that those rules are blocked. The Manufacturers Association of Nigeria, MAN, rejected the, the Continental Free Trade Zone, and we are talking to them. Similarly, NACCIMA, several of the of the business bodies, even Industrial and Competitiveness Council have expressed serious reservations, and we must consult. We are a private we are a private-sector-driven economy. We cannot just say because we were involved in the process. Every African country was involved in the process. What is our duty as a responsible government? To ensure that we take into account all of the different issues that are involved before we sign.

Even, even, even trade remedies, even in a regime of trade remedies, we have not put in place the AfCTA has not put in place a sufficient regime of trade remedies. All of these issues have to be taken into account; there is no hurry to rush into, into, into signing that agreement. There’s no hurry whatsoever. We must make sure that we cover all our basis, all the basis, before we sign. That really is the issue.

[01:41:43] Moderator: Thank you very much. Candidate of the ANN.

[01:41:46] Khadija: So if we are going to, we have to look at all the surrounding circumstances of that agreement before signing. We are, we are, we have the policy to be driven by private sector like he said. But we, in our own, we are we are looking at it in a different way because once you sign an agreement, you are already completely bounded by the we have to look at how much that agreement will affect the common man in the street. What will how much employment will that agreement bring? How would it upgrade the development of our industries which we are looking at diversifying? How would it also affect the GDP that we are looking to expand?

So in those in that agreement, we’ll sit down and, and, and ensure that there is provision for agree for employment, where issues of employment because a lot times, we see that the Chinese government are coming in, and they are coming in with all their people to most of their people to come and work without taking cognizance that we have a lot of people who are employed unemployed in Nigeria. So what we will do as, as, as a party in our government is to ensure that everybody is taken care of, because we also want to collaborate with other parties, other countries, we want to encourage free trade zone.

We’ll also look at how much that agreement will affect our local industries: if it’s going to help us, if it’s going to be like an exchange, it’s important for us to look at it carefully before signing, and it has to be in alliance it has to be in tandem with what our general policies stand for in our par in our government. Thank you.

[01:43:34] Moderator: Thank you very much. Candidate of the ACPN.

[01:43:37] Ganiyu: Well, I thank God that the sitting government has not signed the agreement, because the agreement will not be in the interest of this country. And I say so because presently, much is not going on in our, in our e in our economy, especially in our industries. And any program or policy that we sign that will turn Nigeria into a dumping ground for goods from other countries and cripple the local industries will not be in, in, in the index in the interest of us. It’s a good thing that as brothers, that we trade with each other, but are we going to get equal advantage from them? Now, most of our industries that were hitherto most of the industry that were formerly based in this country have relocated to Benin, Togo, and some other neighboring countries.

So what will it benefit Nigeria with the highest population and a very big market in Africa? I think the proper thing is for Nigerian government to put the signing of the agreement on hold until the economy of this country improves and our manufacturer industries are thriving.

[01:44:53] Moderator: Thank you very much. Candidate of YPP?

[01:44:56] Umma: Thank you very much. As where Nigeria is standing today, I don’t think it’s a wise decision to go signing such kind of agreement. We have advantage of population. If at all Nigeria today will try to inject some funds, let’s even start with the state level, where each and every state in Nigeria, let’s not even talk about the let’s not even talk about of the natural resources. You can see that each and every state in Nigeria have something, one thing or the other, that they are producing that’s different from what we used to have all over the world. If at all we will inject some amount or some investment into such kind of businesses or such kind of creativity into each and every state, definitely, we will get what we want, but that’s when the country will be very, very strong in production.

That’s when such kind of policies will favor Nigeria, but not at this stage we are where Nigeria doesn’t produce much, and our export activity is very, very low. Thank you very much.

[01:46:00] Moderator: Yes, candidate of the PDP.

[01:46:03] Peter: Thank you very much. Like I said before, our government will be demand-driven, not supply-driven. That means you need to consult the people at the stage of planning, not at the stage of signing, you, you say oh well, we need to go and consult the people. We will do it before we get to that stage. So you don’t need to fear about China’s transshipment; that shows inefficiency. Labor is labor is more expensive in China today than is in Nigeria. In fact, we have 87 million people who don’t have job. So if goods that are manufactured in China can leave China and you pay the high shipment including duty clearing and it’s cheaper than what you manufacture, something is wrong here, so you fix it.

And look at the just let me just give you an example: just Apapa. To bring out goods in Apapa cost more than it cost to bring the goods from Europe to here.

[01:47:00] Moderator: Thank you very much. Thank you.

[01:47:01] Peter: That’s transport.

[01:47:02] Moderator: Thank you. Candidate of the APC.

[01:47:05] Prof. Yemi: Yes, I think my rebuttal is simple. Question really is that the A the Continental Free Trade Area has been negotiated for years; the negotiation started even under the previous government. So the question of consultation or not consultation and when it ought to have taken place really could have taken place many years ago when they started these negotiations. Second point is that labor is not the only factor of production it’s not the only cause. So the mere fact that labor is cheaper in Nigeria than China doesn’t mean that goods produced in Nigeria will be cheaper than China.

What is going on today, for example, is that if you import rice from China, it will still be cheaper because a lot of their rice is stored up there and it’s heavily subsidized as well, just as from America. Second point is that we still have issues around power. Power is a major cause. That’s one of the reasons we are investing so heavily in transmission and generation and trying our best to do with distribution. So there are many other causes, not just about labor. I mean, if you talk about labor, that’s a that’s, that’s just one single cause.

[01:48:09] Moderator: Thank you.

[01:48:09] Prof. Yemi: There are so many other cause.

[01:48:10] Moderator: Thank you.

[01:48:10] Prof. Yemi: So, dumping is a major issue.

[01:48:12] Moderator: Thank you very much. Let me stay with you, candidate of the APC. Now, the Central Bank of Nigeria is very passionate about 41 items that have been excluded from the Forex market. Only recently, another item fertilizer was added. Is it a god a very a good policy in your view?

[01:48:37] Prof. Yemi: Well, let me say, first of all, that the Central Bank of Nigeria is independent in terms of its own activities, and I really cannot change or not change their policies, but let me say to you that just take some of the examples. Toothpicks, for example, were being imported into Nigeria. Fertilizer, which we have now cracked with the alli with the collaboration we have with Morocco, we are now able to deliver fertilizer at half the cost. So, you have fertilizer now at, at some 6,000, 7,000. At some point, it was about 12, 13,000 even higher. So you can no longer do that. And rice is also another example. We were importing practically all of our rice.

As I said, $5 million of rice every single day. Today, we are no longer doing so, we’ve encourage local production by preventing a situation where anybody can simply go and buy rice, and simply go and open a [form?] and bring in rice. So if you are going to protect local industry, if you are going to protect local if you are going to protect local activity, then you need to do something like what you may need to do something such as what the CBN is doing. My own point on that is that when you have where you have a situation such as we have today, these 41 items, it is not a ban on those items, all that the CBN is saying is you can’t come to us for foreign exchange; you can go and source your foreign exchange wherever you want, but you can’t come to the CBN for these items where they believe which they believe can be produced locally.

So that really is the point.

[01:50:13] Moderator: Thank you very much. Candidate of the ANN. Nigeria is perhaps the only oil producing country in the world today that imports petroleum products and this is because our refineries are not performing optimally.

[01:50:30] Khadija: Our factories —

[01:50:31] Moderator: Now, our refineries are not performing optimally, and so we have to import export crude and import refined products. What would you do as vice-president or your government if you get elected? Would you build new refineries, or would you privatize the ones that we have now?

[01:50:55] Khadija: Now, like I said the last time that we are going to heavily invest in a PPP kind of government, which is the public private public partnership. So we are grateful that, at least, right now, we have one Nigeria that is trying to upgrade is trying to build refineries. I don’t see why, as a country, if the systems are well-developed and the processes are strengthened, why we should be importing, bringing in petroleum when we are the ones that have all that. What we should be looking at is building more refineries in the country, expanding on those, and asking the private sector to get involved.

Also, asking international communities to collaborate with us on how to ensure that the petroleum the petroleum sector is well strengthened. And also, the infrastructure aspect of building the refineries, ensuring that the, the huge transparency cloud, IT, ICT system will be, will be encouraged so that all the processes and the systems will be transparent enough for everybody to see what’s going on, for the econ for the common man to know what is going on in the petroleum sector. Right now, a lot of things are not being transparent, and we don’t know. But what we want to do differently is to ensure that more refineries are built, more PPP are ensure are established, and also to ensure that other the diversification: we should not depend at all on petroleum.

We should diversify our economy in agriculture, in ensuring that we have more industry, and so on and so forth.

[01:52:48] Moderator: Candidate of the ACPN. Some experts have suggested that what is required is concessioning of some critical infrastructure or sectors of the economy. For instance, the refineries and even in the aviation sector. What will be the agenda of the ACPN when it comes to power as far as concessioning of critical infrastructure is concerned?

[01:53:21] Ganiyu: Well, I have said this earlier that one of the cardinal principle of the ACPN, as contained in our manifesto, is to bring reforms. And the reforms will be in the petroleum sector and other sectors where the government is the major stakeholders. You see, the attitude of Nigerians to public enterprises are nothing to write home about. We have four refineries; none of them is working. And they are due to human factors. And if you continue to do this thing, our people we’ll leave our people to become continue to be vulnerable.

What we’ll do is to hands-off the interest of government in all the federal government businesses, so that they can be handed over to the to investors. In that way, you see, if you have your own business, you will monitor it jealously to make sure that you are making profit. So you do it to make profit. When but if it is government business, a Nigerian government business is not anybody’s business. So, in the reform that we are going to do, in the critical sector of the Nigerian economy, all business interest of the government will be privatized, and we will encourage people.

We encourage our people and investors where necessary, even with funds, with funds and partnership to make sure that services are provided for our people at minimal cost.

[01:55:05] Moderator: Thank you very much. Candidate of the YPP. What would be the major economic thrust of your party if it gets elected as far as the aviation sector is concerned?

[01:55:21] Umma: Well, we know that those days we used to have Nigerian Airways which were very, very one of the largest airlines in the world, and today, African countries like Egypt, Ethiopia, and others have taken that away from us. The major thing a typical Nigerian needs to get to look into is to see how we can rekindle patriotism into our hearts. Because all these things, we have them in abundance. All we have the manpower, we have resources to fix those things I think, recently, we heard the news that we are all overjoyed that there will be a kind of the bringing back or the reawakening of the Nigerian Airways which we were all joyful about, but as time goes on, the thing just we don’t know what happened to it.

So, to be candid, what Nigeria just need is patriotic leaders leaders that have Nigeria at heart. This is just what I will say about the aviation sector. Thank you very much.

[01:56:19] Moderator: Thank you very much. Candidate of the PDP, let me take you to the ICT sector. It is one of the fastest growing in the world today, and the power of ICT to transform the economy is not in doubt. What will your government do as far as the ICT sector is concerned?

[01:56:38] Peter Obi: Well, you are talking about the investment in education in STEM: Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics education. That is the future. I’ve said it before that the more you invest in education, the better your economy. So we will aggressively invest in education. I have done this even as a governor of a state where I took a state from being number 28 to number 1 because we know the value of education. And we are first to buy and reequip all our schools with ICT. I understand what that is all about. Go to HP and bought the highest computer ever bought by a government in Africa: 30,000. So I know the value; I know what it is today.

Just look at one simple thing. The economy of Nigeria is $420 billion. South Africa is 280, that’s 700. Egypt that is the number three is 250. 950, when Apple market capitalization is 1 trillion. So, you need to invest in that. And it show clearly in the world that in 2020, you will have 25 million STEM jobs available in the world. We will take ICT serious; we will invest in it. That’s why I said you can’t continue doing subsidy when you need to invest money in the future. You are driving yesterday. If you continue to do what we’re doing, you’re [inaudible] investing in yesterday. Those who think about yesterday and today will miss tomorrow; we need to invest in tomorrow, and that we’ll invest in ICT, aggressively.

That’s what our government would do, and I’m sure that’s what Atiku would do.

[01:58:22] Moderator: Thank you very much. Thank you. Any rebuttals on any of the issues?

[01:58:28] Prof. Yemi: Well, just to say that with respect to technology, we are not talking about what we will do, we are talking about what we are doing. And what we are doing is that we are investing very heavily in technology. At the moment, we’ve set up six technology hubs in the six geopolitical zones. Those technology hubs are being funded mainly by the federal government; some of them are part-funded. STEM education is critical, and we’ve as you know, we’ve done the curriculum, which is not just STEM, it includes it’s actually STEAM. It includes Arts Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts, and Maths, which is very crucial.

And we’re looking and we have also invested, we’ve also invested heavily even here even here in Abuja in, in five model classrooms for technology. We are looking at what to do for, for technology training, and how to make technology training available for everyone. We set up a technology advisory group which brings in —

[01:59:34] Moderator: Thank you very much, sir.

[01:59:34] Prof. Yemi: all technology okay.

[01:59:36] Moderator: Thank you very much. At this point in time, we go on a break, and when we return, we’ll be talking a lot more about the economy and business environment in Nigeria. Stay with us.

[01:59:49] [Break]

[02:03:27] Moderator: Welcome back. All right, let’s turn to the candidate of the Alliance for New Nigeria.

[02:03:32] Khadija: Wow.

[02:03:33] Moderator: The Nigerian economy today is still burdened by the problems of power supply.

[02:03:39] Khadija: Okay.

[02:03:40] Moderator: Now, specifically, if you are elected to government, how many megawatts of power do you think your government can generate per year?

[02:03:52] Khadija: Right now, right now, we are diver what we have right now, we have the prepaid meter kind of what we are having in government right now is prepaid, and still, Nigerians are not feeling the impact of what is what we have presently. We want to generate aside from the four hydroelectric and gas and all those things that we have, we want to diversify the eco the power sector. We want to upgrade the megawatt to more than the present numbers that we have. We want to ensure that we have maximum demand we want to ensure that the prepaid meter and maximum demand meters for all government and ministries, department, agencies understand what it means to understand the essence of power in governance.

So what we’re, we are, we want to, we are upgrading the present level of power supply that we expand, we use innovation to also bring about the new systems of power diversification that we are trying to do aside from the present one that we have, because we know that the megawatt is not enough for us.

[02:05:17] Moderator: Thank you very much. Thank you. The candidate of the ACPN. The Ajaokuta Steel Company has got over $10 billion in the last 30 years. Now, what is your plan for this very critical infrastructure?

[02:05:36] Ganiyu: The issue of Ajaokuta has been there for a very long time, and it has been fraught with corruption serious corruption. And now, a drain a drain pipe to the nation’s economy. Ajaokuta could have been one of the major, big industry that could have set the stay for the, for the progress and development of this country. Just last week, I think I read in one of the papers that the nation the Senate has approved about N1 billion to be injected into Ajaokuta Steel Company Steel Rolling Company. Despite all the several billions that has been sucked into it all till now. The, the government is not benefiting anything from it.

I think what we’ll do, what our government in power will do is to look into the issue of Ajaokuta Steel Rolling Mill critically so that it will be able to proffer a lasting solution to it. This is a major economic [pause] something for our nation. What we’ll do [laughter] is to advertise and to, to, to for people to do a competitive bidding so that we can pick the best company that has the capacity to turn the industry around so that, still, the Steel Rolling Mill can be brought back to life.

[02:07:13] Moderator: Thank you very much. Candidate of the YPP, the Steel Rolling Mills in Nigeria are all, as it were, not working to capacity. And this is also a function of the fact that the Ajaokuta Steel Company has been down for several years after so much has been spent. What do you think is the way forward?

[02:07:42] Umma: Well, the way forward to fixing the steel industry in Nigeria is initially, I could remember, I read about the plan to fix it, but I just don’t know; so what’s happening why it’s not being fixed? But we intend to invest and bring in investors, because I know in, in Nigeria, we have a lot of Chinese that are into business, but into that very business especially in my Northern part of the country. But we still need investors, and we still need to partner with local interested people to see how we can be also part of this business and how we can generate funds to go into this sector.

And the second thing, I’m very sure a lot of I heard somebody talking about why the steel company is not working is still power issue, so I think we need to rekindle, still, patriotism into the hearts of Nigeria to see how we can cripple the generator mafias, because I’m very sure, by defeating such, Nigeria will have power supply and most of our industries today will be at work. Thank you.

[02:08:52] Moderator: Thank you very much. Candidate of the PDP. Nigeria’s ease of doing business ranking is currently at 146 out of 190 countries, and there’s been an improvement in recent times, yet, this is not a very good ranking for our country and for our economy. What will you do to improve the ease of doing business if you get elected?

[02:09:18] Peter Obi: Well, the first is to look at where your competitors are. If I belong to the BRICS nations, where are they? If I belong to the MINT nations, where are they? If you look at all the rankings, they are just below hundred, and you are 146, so it’s not good for you to compete. And what are you going to do that I keep saying that government needs to move out of business and do the right things. There’s so many things you can do. Let me take history of port, for example. Nigerian Ports Authority, for years, looked at the expansion that is coming and everything and decided not to invest.

Instead, we’re using money wrongly. Nigerian Ports Authority is the only port in the world that has an office even guest house outside its country of operation. They have a guest house in London. And that is the problem: you are not investing money in the business. And the reason why they are not investing money in the business is that the source of their money, the source of their money is in the govern the waste that is in government continues to drive their process. So you need to get these things to be more efficient by allowing them to get their money from the capital market.

If the money they are using to pay today is from the capital market, they will become more efficient because they have monies, loans that they need to pay back, they’ll now get new managers, and banks will after them.

[02:10:44] Moderator: Thank you very much. Thank you. Candidate of the APC.

[02:10:48] Prof. Yemi: Can, can, can I rebut before I —

[02:10:50] Moderator: Yes.

[02:10:51] Prof. Yemi: Can I rebut?

[02:10:52] Moderator: Please, go ahead. One minute.

[02:10:53] Prof. Yemi: I thought the candidate of the PDP will, at least, acknowledge that while under the PDP, we fell 64 places down on the World on the World Bank Index. Under us, we’ve moved 24 spaces in 18 months; 24 places up in the ease of doing business. The second things is if you say investment haven’t taken place in years, who has been in office these last 16 years? [Laughter] Isn’t it just incredible isn’t it just incredible how it is possible to keep a straight face and talk about all that has gone wrong, why this country is where we are today, and why we are where where we are why we are where we are today is because of 16 years of mismanagement of resources.

That’s the problem. That’s why we are where, where we are that’s why we are today. That’s why. So all these investments ought to have been done; we are investing in infrastructure now with 60% less. We are investing in infrastructure 60% less; we are doing far more with less. That’s the kind of thing we are talking about. Our port is 38 our port is supposed to be taking 38 million metric tons —

[02:12:01] Moderator: Thank you very much. Thank you.

[02:12:02] Prof. Yemi: It’s doing 83 at the moment.

[02:12:04] Moderator: Thank you. Thank you. Let me say here that this is not an altercation between two parties. [Laughter] You have the opportunities for rebuttal. And let me come to your question, and that is also related to the ease of doing business and that’s about how to attract more foreign direct investments. If you get reelected, what would you do differently from what you have done in the last three-and-half years —

[02:12:34] Prof. Yemi: I think our foreign —

[02:12:35] Moderator: to attract more direct foreign investment to the Nigerian economy?

[02:12:40] Prof. Yemi: Certainly, what we intend to do is to build on what we are doing; that’s why we are talking about the next level. We need to build on what we are doing. At the moment, we moved 24 places up in the ease of doing business. It means, of course, that even internationally, it’s been accepted that we are one of the top ten reforming economies in the world; that’s World Bank report. So what we really need to do is to build on that. And we are exact and we are doing exactly that. One of the issues with foreign direct investment of course is in creating the environment. Power.

We need to improve power, which is one of the critical issues for us which we are doing, improving transmission assets, improving distribution assets. At the moment, we have improved transmission assets by 2,000 megawatts. So where we inherited 5,000 megawatts of delivery on transmission, we are now able to do 7,000 megawatts of delivery on transmission, and we need to keep improving. We need to improve our railroads, because for example, if you look at the Lagos-Kano rail, it starts from the port, from the Apapa Port, so that goods can be taken out of the Apapa Port up out into the hinterland.

So we need to improve road infrastructure, we need to improve rail infrastructure which is what we are doing. So the critical investments that needs to be made in infrastructure are being made now because today, you have a you have a prudent government, you have a government that is ensuring that ground corruption is not allowed so that the resources available to us are being invested in the economy. That’s how come we can improve invest five times more than when we were earning a hundred dollars a barrel or $114 a barrel. So that’s the thing. We will simply focus on what we are doing and improve the infrastructure.

Once you improve the infrastructure, foreign investments will come. We will also create the environment for local industry; that’s what one of the critical issues for us: creating the environment for local industry. And we are creating that environment already for local industry by all of the steps we are taking, by entry and exit of ports, we are doing all of that, looking at the taxation regime, and some other —

[02:14:43] Moderator: Thank you very much, sir. Thank you. Now, we are on the home stretch now, and we must quickly take a question each on foreign policy. The ANN. Foreign policy. I mean, you said that Nigerian policy has hardly changed for decades. What do you think is the right foreign policy for Nigeria at this stage of our development and in a changing global environment?

[02:15:17] Khadija: Foreign because of one of the Rs that we have in ANN, about reforming the foreign policies that we have, we presently have what we are doing differently is to ensure that every kind of collaboration that has been that has been existing before will change. We want to do foreign policies on health care services service delivery, foreign policies on education, foreign policies on security. What we what, what, what has been one of the problems that has happened to what has happened to us that we have a lot of proliferation of issues on insecurity is because we’ve not tightened up the knots on our foreign policy matters.

We’ve not done enough to ensure that this aspect of our system is adequately taken care of. Now, we have people coming in from the border side, coming in that’s from the small, small towns like the Chad Basins, the Chad area, the Cameroon area with arms. What have we what has, what has the present government done about these proliferation of arms and these which is causing a lot of conflicts within these within our communities, killing our people and all that. What we are going to do differently is to ensure that there’s homeland security which will ensure that all the all the military security agencies have an information system sharing which everybody will ensure that, everybody coming in into our communities, we are well aware of.

There will be sharing of information and ensuring that our borders and secured. And having the fact that right now, what I feel is that government is not doing enough to ensure that places who were —

[02:17:21] Moderator: Thank you very much.

[02:17:22] Khadija: where we have given —

[02:17:22] Moderator: Thank you. Candidate of the ACPN. What will be the foreign policy thrust of your government if you get elected?

[02:17:30] Ganiyu: The foreign policy of the government of ACPN will be one that will be of mutual benefit to our country and to the countries of the world. This is because the world is a global village, and we tend to share advice, we share expertise, we share so many things together. What our government will do is that the relationship which we’ll have with other people, especially in trade, will be the one that our country will benefit from. Then in also in security, it has been very difficult for this country to get supplies of the required machinery to combat the Boko Haram menace and other security matters that we have that is staring our country in the face.

We will ensure that we build our relationship with countries that have experts in all these machinery so that they will have confidence that the equipment they will be sending to Nigeria will be used for the purpose for which, for which it was required. Then also, we will have relations with our neighboring countries, because we are brothers. Whatever is affecting Nigeria negatively will obviously affect countries like Cameroon, Niger, Chad, and other West African countries that are bordering the Nigerian territory.

So, in the to fight Boko Haram successfully and other insurgents, I think we will require collaboration of all these countries so that if the fight get to a stage and the Boko Haram fighters are receding, there will be attack from other countries. So —

[02:19:20] Moderator: Thank you.

[02:19:21] Ganiyu: things that cannot be done alone, we’ll try and see how other countries of the world can collaborate with us.

[02:19:26] Moderator: Thank you very much. Candidate of the YPP.

[02:19:29] Umma: Thank you very much. Professor Kingsley Moghalu has served in the CBN for good five years, and his performance there can never be over-emphasized. He was part of certain such policies that during his time, there was an economic meltdown that affect a lot of countries in this world, but Nigeria was not directly affected then due to the good work of his team. So I’m very sure Professor Kingsley Moghalu has a very good plan for Nigeria to set a very good foreign policies that will suit our country. Thank you very much.

[02:20:07] Moderator: Thank you. Candidate of the PDP. What will be the party’s foreign policy thrust?

[02:20:15] Peter Obi: Well —

[02:20:15] Moderator: Will Africa still be the centerpiece of Nigeria’s foreign policy?

[02:20:20] Peter Obi: It will remain so, because I believe that we are first Africans and we are we have a lot to gain and to offer Africa. And while dealing with other nations, making sure that our relationship is beneficial to our country and brings a lot of value in terms of security, in terms of high economic turnaround and everything that will help us to create jobs and help us to see that what it will be a win-win situation. Not a situation where we are now going around all over the world borrowing; we will go more to learn about what they are doing, because I believe that what they are doing will be more valuable to us to implement here than a situation where we are almost going to borrow everything from China.

[02:21:12] Moderator: Thank you very much. Candidate of the APC. Now, having drawn the government for three-and-half years, what is it that you think you need to do differently as far as foreign policy is concerned?

[02:21:27] Prof. Yemi: I think the major focus of our foreign policy is and will remain the economy and security. So, for example, in trade, on all of on trade issues, we are extremely vigilant. We just set up a trade office, a trade negotiations office, which has never been in existent so that we are able to enter into fair trade agreements with everyone else and that accounts for some of the work we are doing on the A on the AfCTA. Also, some of the Economic Partnership Agreements that we are supposed to have signed with Europe, with the, with the European Union, these are the sorts of issues that we are looking at.

We are saying, for instance, that we will that we cannot sign those EPAs as they are currently, because we are looking out for the economic interest of Nigeria in our foreign relations. Second, of course, is security. One of the points has been made, is that we will cooperate with our neighbors. Indeed, that is what is going on at the moment. The multinational Joint Task Force is one such cooperation. So, Chad, Cameroon, Niger are partners with us in fighting Boko Haram and other and other forms of terrorism that may be showing up, especially the Islamic State of West Africa and all of that.

So, clearly, what our foreign policy will be and continue to be is emphasis on the economy and emphasis on security. All of our friends, whether they are in the West or whether they are Africans, we will judge their relationship with us on the basis of how beneficial they are to our economy and to our security.

[02:23:00] Moderator: Thank you very much. Now, you have an opportunity to make your closing statement one minute each not more than one minute. Your closing statement.

[02:23:09] Ganiyu: Well, thank you. It’s just to implore Nigerians that we are at a critical stage in the life of this country, and that we should open our eyes and vote and Nigerians should vote for a candidate based on the manifesto that they are presenting to them. That Nigerian economy now is vulnerable. It’s vulnerable and can collapse any time. We need an expert, somebody who knows how to turns thing around to fix it, so that Nigeria can be taken back to the path of progress and prosperity. That Nigeria should please vote for the ACPN for a change. We are sure of the reforms that we wanted to bring; we should not be afraid to reform, and that if we vote for our party, Nigeria will be better for all of us.

[02:23:57] Moderator: Thank you very much. Candidate of the ANN.

[02:24:01] Khadija: Fellow Nigerians, the decisions we have to make in 2019 is whether we want more of the last four years or a departure from the last four years. We all have experienced firsthand the pains of the last four years brought upon us by a cabal that runs the government. What Nigeria needs is freedom from this bondage called the cabal, and what we offer in ANN is to ensure that a new Nigeria is birth a new Nigeria where you can have opportunities for all to pursue your own happiness.

A new Nigeria where you are where we are are where you are commit where we want the ANN is committed to that new Nigeria, and we are happy that with the four cardinal principles that we have in reducing the cost of governance, in reforming our civil services and institutions, in restructuring our economic base, in reorienting all these —

[02:25:03] Moderator: Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.

[02:25:04] Khadija: all these, we are committed to reorienting the minds of our people. Thank you.

[02:25:07] Moderator: Candidate of the APC.

[02:25:10] Khadija: God bless Nigeria. [Laughter]

[02:25:13] Umma: Amen. Amen.

[02:25:15] Prof. Yemi: Thank you. Nigeria is where it is today because of 16 years of misrule. [Laughter] The first thing to say, the first thing to say is that will I be allowed? The first thing to say is that poverty in 2004 in Nigeria was 80 million; as of 2014, it went to a 112 million in Nigeria. What we set out to do from 2015 was to reduce that poverty and contain it. That’s why we set up a social investment program of N500 billion despite the fact that we were earning 60% less. What we’ve tried to do in the past four years is to redress the damage that had been done.

We intend and what we’ve done in that past four years, first of all, is to prevent the leakages, the corruption that brought us to where we were.

[02:26:16] Moderator: Thank you very much, sir.

[02:26:17] Prof. Yemi: Yes, sir.

[02:26:17] Moderator: Thank you. [Applause] Candidate of the PDP.

[02:26:21] Peter: Let me start first by thanking Nigerians, and secondly, thanking my dear wife for her support especially in this particular journey, and also to remind Nigerians that Atiku-Obi presidency is about create making Nigeria work again, because Nigeria is not working today. [Applause] We are in a situation where we are in a situation where four years ago, on March 26th, 2016–2015, our president said to us, “If I fail to deliver, choose your leader.” The question is, have they delivered? Today [audience jeer] —

[02:27:07] Moderator: Please, please, please.

[02:27:08] Peter: Today, today, we have a situation where our President told our children that are there in the sea, they are on their own. Those children are not on their own. We will care for them. We will look for them. We will ensure that, that vulcanizer who needs power gets power.

[02:27:23] Moderator: Thank you very much.

[02:27:24] Peter: Thank you.

[02:27:25] Moderator: Thank you. [Applause] Candidate of the YPP [audience cheer] please, please, please, please, please, please, candidate of the YPP, your closing remarks.

[02:27:38] Umma: My fellow Nigerians, we had a very long night.

[02:27:42] Moderator: Please, give her audience, please.

[02:27:43] Umma: You’ve listened to all of us tonight, and Nigerians are wiser; they are not the Nigerians of yesterday. I’m very sure you will judge who is hear sincerely to offer you something new, to give you back your Nigeria. We are here today to call on the 84 million voters which are mainly young women young women and men, to come out and vote for their choices. During 2015 election, we were left with no choice. But today, give-a-Moghalu ticket is the option we are giving to Nigerians to come back and retrieve their Nigeria. Thank you very much.

[02:28:20] Moderator: Thank you very much. Thank you. We’ll like to thank all our candidates who have made it here today. The candidate of the Allied Congress Party of Nigeria, Ganiyu Galadima, thank you so much. Candidate of the Alliance for New Nigeria, ANN, Khadija Abdullahi-Iya, thank you so much. Candidate of the All Progressives Congress, APC, [applause] Professor Yemi Osinbajo, candidate of the People’s Democratic Party, the PDP, [applause] Peter Obi, and candidate of the Young Progressive Party, YPP, Umma Abdullahi Getso. Thank you. We will now take the National Anthem, and please, after the National Anthem, we appeal to the candidates to remain standing behind their desks.

The National Anthem, please.

[02:29:27] [National Anthem Plays]

[02:30:13] Moderator: [Crowd cheers] Thank you very much. Please, please, listen to this. Please, listen to this. Remain seated. Please, remain seated. Nobody should come to the stage. Nobody should come to the stage at this point in time. Remain seated where you are, or if you choose to stand, remain standing. We will be presenting certificates to the candidates, and they will be having a group photograph. Thank you, and please, do not step forward if you are not required here. Thank you. [Pause] We are doing that in alphabetical order. First is the candidate of the Allied Congress Party of Nigeria, ACPN, Ganiyu Galadima. [Pause]

Next is the candidate of the Alliance for New Nigeria, ANN, Khadija Abdullahi-Iya. [Pause] The candidate of the All Progressives Congress, APC, Professor Yemi Osinbajo is next. [Applause] [Pause] The candidate of the People’s Democratic Party, PDP, [Crowd cheers] Peter Obi. [Pause] The candidate of the Young Progressives Party, YPP, Umma Abdullahi Getso. [Applause]

[02:33:12] Speaker 3: Hello. Thank you very much, everyone. Can we please as we are still seated, we will take photographs.

[02:33:17] Moderator: Please, remain seated; do not come to the stage, please.

[02:33:19] Speaker 3: Please, let’s be seated; the Nigerian Elections Debate Group will be having photographs. Please, let’s remain seated.

[02:33:39] Speaker 4: You’ve been watching the vice-presidential debate organized by the Nigerian Elections Debate Group and the Broadcasting Organization of Nigeria reaching you live on Channels Television from Abuja. Now, we are unable to bring you our regular program at this time: Sports Tonight. But do stay tuned for the broadcast of another program: Hard Copy.

[02:34:04] [Music]

[02:34:14] [End of Video]